<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN"
"topic.dtd">
<topic id="src-ap-vb3-introduction">
  <title>Introduction</title>

  <body>
    <p>This document defines the application profile that can be used to
    publish and exchange controlled vocabularies and reference data (named
    authority lists, thesauri, taxonomies, classifications, subject headings,
    etc.). This application profile is based on the Simple Knowledge
    Organisation System (SKOS), which is a common data model for sharing and
    linking knowledge organization systems via the Web. The SKOS data model
    provides a standard, low-cost migration path for porting existing
    knowledge organization systems to the Semantic Web. SKOS also provides a
    lightweight, intuitive language for developing and sharing new knowledge
    organization systems. It may be used on its own, or in combination with
    formal knowledge representation languages such as the Web Ontology
    language (OWL)<fn>Bechhofer, S., &amp; Miles, A. (2009). SKOS Simple
    Knowledge Organization System Reference. <xref format="html"
    href="https://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/"
    scope="external">https://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/</xref></fn>.</p>

    <p>The scope of the application profile is originally intended for, but
    not limited to, the reference metadata assets managed by the Publications
    Office of the European Union. <term>Reference metadata</term> assets refer
    to thesauri, taxonomies, authority tables, reference tables, controlled
    vocabularies, etc. Examples of such assets maintained by the Publications
    Office are <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/web/eu-vocabularies/th-dataset/-/resource/dataset/eurovoc"
    scope="external">EuroVoc</xref> thesaurus, <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/web/eu-vocabularies/at-dataset/-/resource/dataset/corporate-body"
    scope="external">Corporate Body</xref>, <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/web/eu-vocabularies/at-dataset/-/resource/dataset/language"
    scope="external">Language</xref> and <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/web/eu-vocabularies/at-dataset/-/resource/dataset/country"
    scope="external">Country</xref> authority lists. The complete list of
    assets can be found on <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/en/web/eu-vocabularies/home"
    scope="external">EU Vocabularies Website</xref>.</p>

    <p>An <term>Application Profile</term> (AP) is a specification that
    re-uses terms from one or more base standards, adding more specificity by
    identifying mandatory, recommended and optional elements to be used for a
    particular application, as well as recommendations for controlled
    vocabularies to be used.</p>

    <p>The Application Profile specified in this document is based on the
    specification of the Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS). SKOS is
    an <xref format="html" href="https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/"
    scope="external"><term>RDF</term></xref><fn>Wood, D., Lanthaler, M., &amp;
    Cyganiak, R. (2014). RDF 1.1 Concepts and Abstract Syntax.</fn> vocabulary
    designed to facilitate interoperability between controlled vocabularies
    published on the Web as Linked Open Data. Additional classes and
    properties from other well-known vocabularies are re-used where
    necessary.</p>

    <p>The work does not cover implementation issues like mechanisms to edit
    or publish metadata assets and expected behaviour of systems implementing
    the Application Profile other than what is defined in the Conformance
    Statement.</p>

    <p>The Application Profile is intended to facilitate controlled
    vocabularies exchange and therefore the classes and properties defined in
    this document are only relevant for the controlled vocabularies to be
    exchanged; there are no requirements for communicating systems to
    implement specific technical environments. The only requirement is that
    the systems can export and import data in RDF in conformance with this
    Application Profile.</p>
  </body>
</topic>
