<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN"
"topic.dtd">
<topic id="src-ap-vb3-introduction">
  <title>Introduction</title>

  <body>
    <p>This objective of this work is to define an Application Profile that
    can be used for the source code of reference metadata authored with
    VocBench3. The scope of the application profile is originally intended
    for, but not limited to, the reference metadata assets managed by the
    Publications Office of the European Union. <term>Reference metadata</term>
    assets refer to thesauri, taxonomies, authority tables, reference tables,
    controlled vocabularies, etc. Examples of such assets maintained by the
    Publications Office are <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/web/eu-vocabularies/th-dataset/-/resource/dataset/eurovoc"
    scope="external">EuroVoc</xref> thesaurus, <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/web/eu-vocabularies/at-dataset/-/resource/dataset/corporate-body"
    scope="external">Corporate Body</xref>, <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/web/eu-vocabularies/at-dataset/-/resource/dataset/language"
    scope="external">Language</xref> and <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/web/eu-vocabularies/at-dataset/-/resource/dataset/country"
    scope="external">Country</xref> authority lists. The complete list of
    assets can be found on <xref format="html"
    href="https://publications.europa.eu/en/web/eu-vocabularies/home"
    scope="external">EU Vocabularies Website</xref>.</p>

    <p>An <term>Application Profile</term> (AP) is a specification that
    re-uses terms from one or more base standards, adding more specificity by
    identifying mandatory, recommended and optional elements to be used for a
    particular application, as well as recommendations for controlled
    vocabularies to be used.</p>

    <p>The Application Profile specified in this document is based on the
    specification of the <xref format="html"
    href="https://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/" scope="external"><term>Simple
    Knowledge Organization System (SKOS)</term></xref><fn>Bechhofer, S., &amp;
    Miles, A. (2009). SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization System Reference.
    </fn>. SKOS is an <xref format="html"
    href="https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/"
    scope="external"><term>RDF</term></xref><fn>Wood, D., Lanthaler, M., &amp;
    Cyganiak, R. (2014). RDF 1.1 Concepts and Abstract Syntax.</fn> vocabulary
    designed to facilitate interoperability between controlled vocabularies
    published on the Web as Linked Open Data. Additional classes and
    properties from other well-known vocabularies are re-used where
    necessary.</p>

    <p>The work does not cover implementation issues like mechanisms for edit
    or publish controlled vocabularies and expected behaviour of systems
    implementing the Application Profile other than what is defined in the
    Conformance Statement.</p>

    <p>The Application Profile is intended to facilitate controlled
    vocabularies exchange and therefore the classes and properties defined in
    this document are only relevant for the controlled vocabularies to be
    exchanged; there are no requirements for communicating systems to
    implement specific technical environments. The only requirement is that
    the systems can export and import data in RDF in conformance with this
    Application Profile.</p>
  </body>
</topic>
